Redux

Redux is a popular state management library for JavaScript applications, particularly those built with React. 
It helps manage the state of an application in a predictable way, enabling easier debugging, testing, and scaling of applications.


Key Concepts of Redux

Single Source of Truth:
The entire state of the application is stored in a single JavaScript object called the store. This makes the state management more predictable and easier to debug.

State is Read-Only:
The only way to change the state is to emit an action, an object describing what happened. This ensures that the state is not modified directly, 
which helps in tracking changes and maintaining predictability.

Changes are Made with Pure Functions:
To specify how the state tree is transformed by actions, you write pure functions called reducers.
Reducers take the current state and an action as arguments and return a new state.

Core Components of Redux

Store:
The store holds the whole state tree of the application. There is only one store in a Redux application.
import { createStore } from 'redux';
import rootReducer from './reducers';

const store = createStore(rootReducer);

Actions:
Actions are payloads of information that send data from the application to the store. They are the only source of information for the store.
const increment = () => {
  return {
    type: 'INCREMENT'
  };
};

Reducers:
Reducers specify how the application's state changes in response to actions sent to the store. They are pure functions.
const counter = (state = 0, action) => {
  switch (action.type) {
    case 'INCREMENT':
      return state + 1;
    case 'DECREMENT':
      return state - 1;
    default:
      return state;
  }
};

Dispatch:
dispatch is the method used to send actions to the store.
store.dispatch(increment());

Selectors:
Selectors are functions that extract and transform pieces of the state. They help in decoupling the state shape from the component logic.
const getCounterValue = (state) => state.counter;

Connecting Redux to React
To connect Redux with React, you typically use the react-redux library, which provides two main features: Provider and connect.

Middleware in Redux
Middleware is a way to extend Redux with custom functionality. Middleware allows you to intercept actions 
before they reach the reducer and perform additional logic such as logging, asynchronous API calls, etc.


npm install redux

Action - describes the changes in the sate
Reducer - actually carries out the state changes given by action
Store - holds the state of the application


App---dispatch--->Reducer---->Store---subscribe--->App

mapStateToProps
mapDispatchToProps

Middleware ******
Redux middleware provides a third-party extension point between dispatching an action, and the moment it reaches the reducer. 
People use Redux middleware for logging, crash reporting, talking to an asynchronous API, routing, and more.

Middleware allows for side effects to be run without blocking state updates. 
We can run side effects (like API requests) in response to a specific action,

Redux Thunk middleware allows you to write action creators that return a function instead of an action. 
The thunk can be used to delay the dispatch of an action, or to dispatch only if a certain condition is met. 
Used to make api calls

Redux Thunk is a middleware that lets you call action creators that return a function instead of an action object. 
That function receives the store’s dispatch method, which is then used to dispatch regular synchronous actions inside the function’s body 
once the asynchronous operations have been completed.

Once Redux Thunk has been installed and included in your project with applyMiddleware(thunk), you can start dispatching actions asynchronously.


Redux Thunk is a middleware that allows you to call the action creators that return a function(thunk) 
which takes the store's dispatch method as the argument and which is afterwards used to dispatch the synchronous action after the API 
or side effects has been finished.

Why Use redux-thunk?
By default, Redux actions must be plain objects. This limitation means that asynchronous logic, such as API calls or complex computations, 
cannot be handled directly within action creators. redux-thunk addresses this limitation by allowing action creators to return a function instead of an action. 
This function receives the store's dispatch method as an argument, allowing you to dispatch actions asynchronously.


thunk vs saga

Simplicity vs. Power
Redux Thunk: Simpler to set up and use, especially for straightforward asynchronous tasks.
Redux Saga: More powerful and better suited for complex tasks, but comes with a steeper learning curve.

Learning Curve
Redux Thunk: Easier to learn for those familiar with JavaScript Promises and async/await.
Redux Saga: Requires understanding of generator functions and the additional concepts provided by the library.

Use Case Suitability
Redux Thunk: Best for simpler or smaller applications where async logic is not too complex.
Redux Saga: Better for larger applications with complex async logic, where more powerful control over side effects is needed.

Testing
Redux Thunk: Can be more difficult to test due to being regular functions.
Redux Saga: Easier to test due to its declarative nature and structured generator functions.

When to Use Redux Thunk
When your async logic is straightforward and doesn't involve complex workflows.
When you need a lightweight solution with minimal setup.
When you're building a small to medium-sized application.

When to Use Redux Saga
When your application has complex async workflows, such as multiple dependent requests, retries, parallel execution, etc.
When you need advanced side effect management features like task cancellation and concurrency control.
When you want easier testing of your async logic.


Redux vs useContext******

Feature		Redux																	useContext
Purpose		Centralized global state management with complex logic 					Provides a way to pass data down the component tree without prop drilling
			and a predictable flow (actions, reducers, store)

Setup		Requires setup with actions, reducers, store configuration				Minimal setup, just create a context and use it

Use Cases	Best for complex, large-scale applications where						Best for simple applications where only a few components need to share state
			many components need to access and update global state
			
API			Requires external libraries like redux, react-redux,					Built-in React API (no external dependencies)
			and possibly redux-thunk or redux-saga
			
State:		Uses reducers (pure functions) and actions to manage updates			State is updated directly in the component that provides the context
Update Logic

Performance	Optimized with middlewares like redux-thunk or redux-saga 				Can cause unnecessary re-renders if not optimized with useMemo or useCallback
			for async actions; tools like reselect for memoization
			
Data Flow	Follows a strict unidirectional data flow								Provides direct access to context values via the Provider component
			(dispatch actions to modify state)
			
Middleware: Supports middleware like redux-thunk, redux-saga 						No built-in middleware support, although side effects 
Support		for handling side effects and async operations							can be handled with useEffect

Dev Tools	Excellent dev tooling via the Redux DevTools for 						No official dev tools for useContext
			time-travel debugging, inspecting actions, and state changes
			
Asynchronous: Handled using middlewares like redux-thunk or redux-saga				Must be handled manually using useEffect or callbacks in React
Actions
Boilerplate: Requires more boilerplate code (store, reducers, actions)				Minimal boilerplate, just create context and provide values

Scalability: Highly scalable and suited for large apps								Can become difficult to manage as the app grows in complexity


Redux: A third-party state management library used for managing global state in large, complex applications.
It provides a central store and follows predictable patterns like actions and reducers to manage state.

useContext: A built-in React hook that allows you to share state or props between components without having to pass props down
through every level of the component tree (prop drilling).
It’s best suited for less complex applications where global state management isn't as intricate as in Redux.


When to Use Redux:
Complex State: When your app has a complex global state that multiple components need to read and write.
Predictable State Flow: When you want a clear, predictable state management pattern (actions → reducers → state changes).
Async Logic: When you need to handle async actions (e.g., fetching data from APIs) using middleware like redux-thunk or redux-saga.
Dev Tools: When you need advanced tools for debugging, time-travel, and state monitoring (Redux DevTools).

When to Use useContext:
Simple State Sharing: When your app is small or medium-sized, and you need to pass values or state to deeply nested components without prop drilling.
Minimal Setup: When you want to avoid Redux's boilerplate and overhead.
Local Global State: For simpler global state, such as themes, user authentication, or language settings.


Different State management methods *****************

1. React's Built-in State Management:
useState Hook:
Purpose: Manages local component state within function components.
Best for: Small, local state management.
Pros: Simple, no setup, built-in to React.
Cons: Limited to managing state within a single component or tightly coupled components.

useReducer Hook:
Purpose: More suited for complex state logic that involves multiple sub-values or state transitions.
Best for: Complex state logic within a single component or a small set of components.
Pros: Reducer pattern is easy to manage and test.
Cons: Not as scalable for global state as Redux or Context.

useContext Hook:
Purpose: Provides a way to pass data (global-like state) to deeply nested components without prop drilling.
Best for: Sharing data globally or across multiple components, like theme settings or user authentication.
Pros: Simple and lightweight for small-to-medium apps.
Cons: Can lead to performance issues if not optimized (e.g., unnecessary re-renders).


2. Third-Party State Management Libraries:
Redux:
Purpose: Manages the global state of an entire application with a central store. Follows a strict pattern of state management with actions and reducers.
Best for: Large and complex applications where many components need to share and update global state.
Pros: Predictable state, time-travel debugging, dev tools, async logic with middlewares like redux-thunk or redux-saga.
Cons: Boilerplate-heavy, can be overkill for simple applications.

Redux Toolkit:
Purpose: A set of tools and abstractions built on top of Redux to simplify its setup and reduce boilerplate.
Best for: Developers who want to use Redux but with less boilerplate and better default patterns.
Pros: Simplifies Redux with slices, built-in createAsyncThunk for async operations, and built-in immutability.
Cons: Same learning curve as Redux but more streamlined.

MobX:
Purpose: A library for state management that focuses on reactivity. State changes automatically re-render components.
Best for: Developers who prefer an object-oriented approach to state management or want a simpler, more reactive model.
Pros: Easy to learn, minimal boilerplate, supports observables for automatic reactivity.
Cons: Less popular than Redux, making it harder to find community support.


Local Component State: Use useState or useReducer when managing state within individual components.
Context API: Use useContext for smaller applications or for global state that isn't very complex.
Redux/Redux Toolkit: Best for large, complex apps with global state and a need for predictability.
MobX/Recoil: Alternatives to Redux for reactive and fine-grained control over state, with simpler setup and reactivity.
Apollo Client/React Query: Perfect for managing server-side state in GraphQL or REST-based applications.


why reducers are pure functions***********
Reducers are pure functions because they:
Always return the same output given the same input (deterministic).
Do not cause any side effects.
Do not mutate their input data (immutability).
Are easy to test due to their pure nature.




































